https://urm.org/support-services/


Many unhoused men, women, and children face ongoing challenges such as chronic health conditions, infections, and unresolved legal issues.

We meet these needs through our clinics and partnerships so our guests can heal and find hope for the future.
Support Services - Clinics<br />
Medical, Dental, Mental Health, and Legal Clinics
UCLA Health—Homeless Healthcare Collaborative

UCLA’s Homeless Healthcare Collaborative is one of only a few full-time clinics in the Los Angeles area devoted to caring for the primary medical needs of people experiencing homelessness. All services at the center are provided free of charge.
USC Dental Clinic

Faculty, students, and interns from the USC School of Dentistry provide free, comprehensive care to underrepresented people in the downtown Los Angeles area. This program is the only dental clinic on Skid Row to care for children.
Pepperdine Mental Health Clinic

The Jerry Butler/Pepperdine Mental Health Clinic provides crucial psychological services for people as they strive to overcome trauma and substance use disorders. Treating their mental health dramatically increases their chances for long-term recovery.
Support Services - Learning Centers
Pepperdine Legal Aid Clinic

Legal violations can often prevent people experiencing homelessness from rebuilding their lives and regaining their independence. The Pepperdine Legal Aid clinic—staffed by an attorney and student law clerks—helps them overcome those past legal issues for good.

The Legal Aid Clinic provides the following services:

    Interviewing, advising, and counseling
    Assistance in resolving tickets and warrants
    Preparation of court paperwork in child support, custody, and visitation cases
    Expungements (dismissing criminal convictions)
    Government benefits
    Assistance with income tax controversies
    Preparation for Homeless Court

Learning Centers

One of the greatest barriers for people transitioning from homelessness to self-sufficiency is a lack of educational opportunity. Vocational training, computer literacy, and General Education Development (GED) are critical if they are to achieve true independence. URM’s Learning Centers are staffed by a team of qualified educators and are supported by fully credentialed LAUSD Instructors. Learning Center teams help guests develop a learning path and use adaptive learning software to realize their education and career goals.
Academic and Professional Program Services
Academic and professional program services include:

    Adult Basic Education (English Language Arts/Mathematics)
    Credit Recovery
    Computer literacy
    Financial Stewardship
    English as a Second Language (ESL)
    Individual and Small Group Tutoring
    GED/HiSET preparation
    Secondary Education Planning
    Topical workshops with partner organizations
    Specialized vocational services and certifications

Previous Learning Center presenters include:

    Homeless Health Care Los Angeles
    LA Public Library
    SNAP Education
    School on Wheels
    Immigrant Defense Lawyers
    Pepperdine Legal Aid
    LA Mission College
    Five Keys Schools and Programs
    Individual Donors and Guest Speakers

Thank you to all the individuals who have helped our guests through tutoring or bringing their organizational knowledge to our guests.

For questions or to get involved with the Learning Center please call the Learning Center Director at (213) 316-2752.
The Way Home
Emergency Services
Recovery
Transitional Programs
Support Services
Connect with us to get the latest news from Union Rescue Mission


The Way Home
Emergency Services
Our guests often arrive after facing the harsh realities of life on the streets or enduring unstable living conditions—often feeling overwhelmed, exhausted, and in deep pain.

Ongoing trauma, intensified by fear and stress, can take a serious toll on both physical and emotional health.

At Union Rescue Mission, we meet each person with compassion and without judgment—offering emergency services that provide a first step toward healing and stability.

When someone has been unhoused for days, weeks, or longer, their access to basic necessities like food, shelter, showers, clean clothing, and hygiene products is scarce. This can contribute to serious health risks, emotional distress, and struggles with mental health or substance use. We’re here to offer care, restore dignity, and help each guest begin their journey toward hope and renewal.
Emergency Services - Meals
Meals

3,000 warm meals are served—
3 times a day, every day
Emergency Services - Shelter
Shelter

Refuge for 1300+ men, woman, and children without referral
Emergency Services - Personal Care
Personal Care

Hot showers, hygiene supplies, diapers, and laundry facilities
Emergency Services - Support Services
Support Services

Medical, dental, mental health, legal aid, education, and training


The Way Home
Recovery
Life on the streets can take a deep toll on a person’s sense of self-worth and dignity. The constant stress and pain often lead people to seek ways to cope, sometimes through harmful patterns or substance use.

At Union Rescue Mission, our recovery programs provide a safe and supportive space for men and women to begin healing, rebuild their lives, and find their way home—with renewed hope and purpose.
The Way Home
Emergency Services
Recovery
Transitional Programs
Support Services
Life-Transformation Program for Women

Our faith-based Damascus Road to Recovery is a one-year residential recovery program uniquely designed for single women seeking to heal from addictions and brokenness so they can rebuild their lives and thrive.

This four-phase program is based far from Skid Row at our beautiful Hope Gardens Family Center for women and children, an oasis of peace and safety in the mountains above Sylmar.
Phase 1 (2 months):

This is the stabilization phase and will focus on the first steps of recovery.

    Detox – first 14 days
    Start attending weekly group meetings, chapel, and Celebrate Recovery

Phase 2 (4 months):

This is the transformation phase and will focus on on recovery, healing and self-discovery.

    Anger management
    Parenting
    Domestic violence
    Healing

    Addiction
    Relapse prevention
    Learning boundaries
    Resilience & reconnection

Phase 3 (3 months):

During this phase, guests will start life skills classes and work therapy.

    Continuation of classes in Phase 2
    Financial management and budgeting

    Resume building and job readiness skills
    Work therapy

Phase 4 (3 months):

This last phase will focus on moving forward and includes looking for employment and permanent housing.

    Continuation of classes from Phases 2 & 3
    Obtaining employment

    Permanent housing
    Education goals

Healing is possible–and a new beginning is within reach. Take the next step.

If you would like to help women heal and rebuild their lives, your support makes lasting recovery possible.
Support transformation.

“The way home for me means being able to get up and look in the mirror. Being able to move forward and not look back. Every day I wake up with a purpose.”

Jen, Program Graduate
Life-Transformation Program for Men

Our faith-based men’s Emmaus Recovery Program helps men overcome addictions and other destructive behavioral/relational issues so they can heal and connect with a healthy community. Changing a life isn’t easy —
it takes time, dedication, and hard work. We offer men the time and guidance they need in three phases:
Phase 1: Seeds of Hope (1 month)

Detox and assessments. Assessments include:

    ASAM (American Society of Addiction Medicine)
    Arizona Self-Sufficiency Matrix
    ESL Test (English as Second Language)

    ACE Score (Adverse Childhood Experiences)
    TABE Score (The Adult Basic Education)

Phase 2: Emmaus (6-9 months)

Designed to find the root cause of addictions, which we define as “pain management.” We offer a trauma-informed approach to recovery with the help of our Pepperdine Mental Health Clinic. The goal is to help men reconnect with God, self and others. This requires healing and an encounter with Jesus in a loving church community. Areas of emphasis include:

    Christian foundation
    Prayer and contemplation
    12-Step recovery
    Addiction education
    Emotionally healthy relationships
    Individual and group therapy

    Anger management
    Grief recovery
    Financial planning
    Education and vocational training
    Trade schools and training assignments
    Regular chapel and church engagement

Phase 3: Apprenticeship (up to 18 months)

Emmaus graduates are encouraged to complete three terms of six-month apprenticeships to ensure their successful transition to independence. Our men use this time to build a solid employment history, attend school, or get vocational training. Graduates continue to live at the Mission as they seek permanent employment, save money, look for affordable housing.

Healing is possible—a new future starts here. Take the next step.

If you would like to help men find healing and a way forward, your support makes lasting transformation possible. Support transformation.


Our transitional programs empower those experiencing homelessness, even with steady employment, to achieve sustainable, independent living.

Our programs support unhoused individuals by providing safe on-site housing, access to care, mentorship, financial guidance, and legal support. Whether someone is working or not, we help them take meaningful steps toward long-term stability and a sustainable future.
Transitional Program
S.E.S. (Singles Emergency Services)

S.E.S. is designed for single men and women who need more than Emergency Services to get back on their feet, but who cannot commit to our longer-term Emmaus Men’s Recovery or Damascus Women’s Recovery Programs.

S.E.S. is a one-year program that helps men and women overcome homelessness by offering them personalized and comprehensive solutions to the issues affecting their lives.
Program benefits include:

    Emergency Services (meals, shelter, wellness, and legal services)
    Life-skills classes including financial management
    Job-readiness tutoring
    A personal storage locker for belongings
    Ongoing case management
    Permanent housing assistance

Program Fee:

Men and women in the S.E.S. program pay $150 per month in program fees and are encouraged to save $60 per month in personal savings.
Family Emergency Services (F.E.S.)
F.E.S. (Family Emergency Services)

F.E.S. is designed to provide families entering our emergency shelter with refuge and support that promotes healing and peace for parents and their children away from the difficult environments of unstable living conditions. Our goal is the safety, health and well-being of every family member, especially the children.

Families can stay for a minimum of 6 months and receive the same services, resources, and support included in our S.E.S. program to help them move forward and make healthy choices for the future.
Program Fee:

Families are asked to pay 15% of their monthly household income, save at least 50% of their income and work with a case manager to help meet this requirement and create individual service plans.

